Add migration guide on Qiskit packaging (#710)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/api/migration-guides/qiskit-1.0.mdx

---
title: Qiskit 1.0 Migration Guide
description: Adapt to changes in Qiskit 1.0
---

# Qiskit 1.0 Migration Guide

## Packaging changes

Qiskit 1.0 uses a different packaging structure to previous Qiskits, and may cause problems in environments using packages that are not ready for Qiskit 1.0.

<Admonition type="caution">
We **do not** recommend attempting to upgrade an existing Python virtual environment from Qiskit 0.45 or before to Qiskit 1.0 in place.
</Admonition>

### For users

You must start a new virtual environment to install Qiskit 1.0.
It is very tricky and error-prone to upgrade an existing installation in-place to Qiskit 1.0.

<Admonition type="info">
This section will use the `venv` module that is part of the Python standard library in its examples.
If you use a different tool (such as `virtualenv` or `conda`), you should consult its documentation if you are unsure of how the commands line up.

> The examples will assume a `bash`-like shell for non-Python command-line inputs.

Reviewer: I would also say "including on windows" for this too because that's the odd one out I think most mac and linux users will just assume this is the case.

Author: I switched to just using the (hopefully) correct PowerShell commands in 75f6e3a.

</Admonition>

<span id="creating-a-venv"></span>
#### Creating the new environment

> 1. Create a new virtual environment, using your preferred (supported!) version of Python 3:

Reviewer: Maybe insert a reference to the platform support section?

Author: I changed this to "Python 3.8+", and omitted the bit about actual OSes - I think a migration guide kind of assumes that you're migrating from something that's working, and we haven't changed the support matrix.

   ```bash
   python3 -m venv ~/qiskit-1.0-venv
   ```

   You can use any path you like in place of `~/qiskit-1.0-venv`.

2. Activate the environment.

   On Linux and macOS:
   ```bash
   source ~/qiskit-1.0-venv/bin/activate
   ```

   On Windows:
   ```bash
   source ~\qiskit-1.0-venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. Install all the packages you want to install.
   You should do this using only one `pip install` command with all the dependencies on it.

   ```bash
   pip install 'qiskit>=1'
   ```

   You can include other packages you want installed alongside `qiskit` here by writing them as following arguments, such as

   ```bash
   pip install 'qiskit>=1' jupyterlab pandas matplotlib
   ```

4. If you are not planning to use the environment immediately, use the `deactivate` command to leave it.

> 

Reviewer: The only potential gotcha here for users that I think is good to call out here is compatibility with other dependencies that depend on qiskit-terra and/or `qiskit<1`. I think this will trip up users the most more than not being able to `pip install -U qiskit` because it's the piece that requires understanding how pip does dep solving or lack thereof and people doing things like `python -m venv test && test/bin/pip install qiskit>=1.0 && test/bin/pip install qiskit-qubit-reuse` (this is a good reminder I should update the plugin package to not depend on terra before 1.0). This will end up in a mixed installation state between qiskit 1.0.0 and qiskit-terra 0.46.0. I think this really should be called out in the top and not just in the troubleshooting guide below.

Author: I've thrown in an admonition warning about this, including a link to the troubleshooting section if people do get into problems in 75f6e3a.  Do you think it's enough?

I don't necessarily want to get too pessimistic up at the top of the guide - if they're just using IBM tooling (which I imagine most users are), they're _hopefully_ not going to have any issues by the time 1.0 is actually released.

  In general, if you `import` it, they meant "package" and if you `pip install` it, they meant "distribution".

* *search path*: When trying to `import something`, Python will search a pre-defined list of places for a *module* or *package* called `something`.
  The list of places is the *search path*.
  You can see and modify the search path in `sys.path`.

* *requirement*: A *distribution* contains information on other distributions it depends on when installed.
  Any other distribution that is necessary is a *requirement*, and the package manager (usually `pip` or `conda`) should ensure that all requirements are installed with compatible versions.

Python is highly dynamic, and it's actually possible for a *module* or *package* not to correspond to files on disk at all, or to be compiled extensions, or many other things.
The *search path* is not only a search over directories—that is only one component—but files on disk are all that matters here.
These complications aren't necessary to understand the problems of this section, so you can use the model described above.
</Admonition>

> Historically, Qiskit comprised of many Python distributions: `qiskit-terra`, the compiler core; `qiskit-aer`, the high-performance simulator; the original IBM Quantum provider; and several now-obsolete packages providing particular exploratory algorithmic or error-mitigation features.

Reviewer: ignis was actually more about running characterization experiments (like qiskit-experiments now) rather than error mitigation.

Author: Thanks - the only bits I ever interacted with were the error-mitigation bits.  Changed in 75f6e3a.

Over time, we removed elements from the metapackage until only `qiskit-terra` remained, as components were retired, or drifted away from really being part of the "necessary" installation of Qiskit (which was always more than was strictly necessary anyway).
Of these components, `qiskit-aer` still exists and is actively updated, it's just always installed as a separate distribution now.
From Qiskit 0.44 onwards, the only component of the `qiskit` distribution has been `qiskit-terra`.

Similarly, we ever more strongly discouraged other libraries from using the namespace hooks.
We removed the last of the Qiskit-family use of the hooks in non-obsolete packages with the release of Qiskit Aer 0.11 and its new `qiskit_aer` Python package, although until Qiskit 1.0 we also did some internal magic to make the namespace path `qiskit.providers.aer` continue to work.
Starting from Qiskit 1.0, we have completely removed the ability for packages to extend any `qiskit` namespace, meaning that `pip uninstall` on the correct distribution in a valid environment will work as expected.

> 

Author: Oh, I didn't actually finish writing this section.  I'll add on a bit more later.

Author: Done in [a25a489](https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/710/commits/a25a489d235fde47e5643118722c7fcc621009ae).

First off: you must be *absolutely* certain that your environments are correct.
The test that Qiskit uses to determine a broken environment is quite robust; specifically, it queries `importlib.metadata` for distribution information on installed packages, and checks the version numbers returned.
The Qiskit 1.0 side of the test also checks for sentinel files that were present in old Qiskits and not Qiskit 1.0.

If you are a Qiskit developer, it's possible that you have old `qiskit.egg-info` or `qiskit-terra.egg-info` (or `*.dist-info`) directories present on your meta path (see `sys.meta_path`), left over from old editable installations.
In particular, check your working directory for any `*.egg-info` and `*.dist-info` directories.
If they're in the root of one of your checked out repositories, you can delete them—the worst that can happen is you might need to `pip install -e .` again, and even that is unlikely, because these ones are typically just part of the `setuptools` build process that doesn't get cleaned up.

If all of the above does not help you, and you are 100% sure your environment is sound (or you are deliberately trying to test a broken environment):

> 1. Please [file an issue on Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/new) explaining how this happened and why your sure the environment is correct so we can fix it.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Please [file an issue on Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/new) explaining how this happened and why you are sure the environment is correct so we can fix it.
```

embarrassing

          </TabItem>

          <TabItem value="win" label="Windows">
            ```powershell
            python3 -m venv C:\path\to\qiskit-1.0-venv
            ```
          </TabItem>
         </OperatingSystemTabs>

<span id="activate"></span>
2. Activate the environment.

        <OperatingSystemTabs>
          <TabItem value="mac" label="macOS">
             ```bash
             source /path/to/qiskit-1.0-venv/bin/activate
             ```
          </TabItem>

          <TabItem value="linux" label="Linux">
             ```bash
             source /path/to/qiskit-1.0-venv/bin/activate
             ```
          </TabItem>

          <TabItem value="win" label="Windows">
            ```powershell
            C:\path\to\qiskit-1.0-venv\Scripts\activate.ps1
            ```
          </TabItem>
         </OperatingSystemTabs>

3. Install packages as desired.
   You should do this by using only one `pip install` command with all the dependencies on it.

   ```bash
   pip install 'qiskit>=1'
   ```

   You can optionally include additional packages by including them as arguments.  For example: 

   ```bash
   pip install 'qiskit>=1' jupyterlab pandas matplotlib
   ```

>    Qiskit 1.0 includes breaking changes, so several packages are marked as not-yet-compatible with it.  Therefore, you might see errors from `pip` until new versions of those packages are released. Old versions of packages might also depend on the legacy `qiskit-terra` package.  Such packages might not return errors when running this command, but might raise an error when running `import qiskit`.

Author: Oh, that's a really neat idea to enforce the negative constraint - I hadn't thought of that at all, but it's a great idea.  I'll write that up a little bit, and it's trivial for me to set up a qisk.it shortlink pointing to your gist.

>    Qiskit 1.0 includes breaking changes, so several packages are marked as not-yet-compatible with it.  Therefore, you might see errors from `pip` until new versions of those packages are released. Old versions of packages might also depend on the legacy `qiskit-terra` package.  Such packages might not return errors when running this command, but might raise an error when running `import qiskit`.

Author: Done in d9d116a6 - the shortlink in there points at the Gist you gave me.

   <Admonition type="caution">

>    Do not install packages that are incompatible with Qiskit 1.0 on this virtual environment.  If you need to use such packages, install them in a separate virtual environment with Qiskit 0.45 or 0.46.

Reviewer 2: The biggest pitfall I see is installing some old dependency that depends on qiskit-terra explicitly. Should that be called out here as something to watch out for? Maybe with a link to the what changed section for more details?

Author: I've put an extra sentence just about the admonition explicitly saying that.

   </Admonition>

>    If you have an existing environment, you can use [`pipdeptree`](https://github.com/tox-dev/pipdeptree/blob/main/README.md#pipdeptree) to query the requirements of your installed packages to see if they require `qiskit<1`.  For any that require `qiskit<1>`, check for updates that make it compatible with Qiskit 1.0. 

Author: ```suggestion
   If you have an existing environment, you can use [`pipdeptree`](https://github.com/tox-dev/pipdeptree/blob/main/README.md#pipdeptree) to query the requirements of your installed packages to see if they require `qiskit<1`.  For any that require `qiskit<1`, check for updates that make it compatible with Qiskit 1.0. 
```

        <OperatingSystemTabs>
          <TabItem value="mac" label="macOS">
             ```bash
             source /path/to/qiskit-1.0-venv/bin/activate
             ```
          </TabItem>

          <TabItem value="linux" label="Linux">
             ```bash
             source /path/to/qiskit-1.0-venv/bin/activate
             ```
          </TabItem>

          <TabItem value="win" label="Windows">
            ```powershell
            C:\path\to\qiskit-1.0-venv\Scripts\activate.ps1
            ```
          </TabItem>
         </OperatingSystemTabs>

<span id="for-developers"></span>
## For developers

If you maintain a package that depends on Qiskit, use this information to learn how to correctly express your compatibility and test against Qiskit 1.0.

### Recommendations for requirements

We recommend that your package requires `qiskit>=0.45,<1` (or other appropriate lower bound) if you are not certain whether the package is compatible with Qiskit 1.0.
This is [the same recommendation being made for NumPy 2.0 compatibility.](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/24300)

A Qiskit 1.0 release candidate, version 1.0.0rc1, will be released on 1 February 2024. 

> You should test your package against this, and as soon as possible, release a new (compatible) version of your package with its upper requirement unpinned.

Reviewer 2: I don't know if it is worth mentioning here that making a new release as soon as possible is important because even if a project releases a new release with `qiskit<1` as a dependency `pip` will just install the previous release that did not have the upper bound on `qiskit`. That behavior is mentioned in the troubleshooting section.

Author: I'll probably leave it out in the interests of "brevity" (he says about a 6k-word document).  If we try to justify everything _too_ much, we run the risk of making it harder to spot the action items, and to some degree, a package maintainer reading this is already trusting that we're making these recommendations from a position of authority.

```

If your package or a transitive dependency has an unavoidable pin on `qiskit<1`, we recommend doing this testing using the manual environment construction as in the above section, because `tox` introduces several complexities by being more strict about environment isolation and installation order.
This is correct behavior by `tox` (we shouldn't construct an invalid environment), but because we already know we're building an invalid environment, these checks get in the way.

```ini
[tox]
minversion = 4.0.0

# This environment section should set up your regular test build.
# We'll extend it later.  This is just an example.
[testenv]
install_command = pip install -c {toxinidir}/constraints.txt -U {opts} {packages}
deps =
    -r{toxinidir}/requirements-dev.txt
commands =
    pytest

[testenv:qiskit-main]
# Set a sequence of commands to run in the environment after everything has been installed,
# but before the main test suite.
commands_pre =
  pip uninstall --yes qiskit qiskit-terra
  pip install 'git+https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit@main'
# All other sections, like the dependencies and the 'commands' section are inherited.
```

<span id="why-did-this-happen"></span>

> ## Why these changes happened

Reviewer 2: I like all the detail here. I wonder if there should be a section (maybe linkable) that just says that the files that were in qiskit-terra are now in qiskit and that pip does not know how to handle overlapping files and will overwrite and erase files from qiskit when operating on qiskit-terra and vice versa, as the quick version of why the careful steps described in the user section are necessary and then those interested can expand out from there.

Author: I think that's an explanation of what about the environment is actually broken, more than "why we did this", maybe?  Do you think we could leave that out, or at least add it a bit later?  (I'm keen to get this merged and published.)

Reviewer 2: Right, I just suggested it here because I had originally suggested it up above before getting to this section and seeing that you had largely covered all the details of what was going on with packaging here. I'll leave it up to you. I don't know what is best to tell users. Mainly what I was thinking is that if a user understood about the same file paths being in both packages and pip not trying to avoid conflicts it might give intuition for understanding problems that arise.

If at least one distribution requires Qiskit 1.0 or greater, `pip` should give you an error message explaining this, which looks like the one in [the section on failed resolutions](#pip-resolution-impossible).

You can also use the `pipdeptree` commands listed in [Create a working environment for Qiskit 1.0](#debug-venv-for-1.0) from within the broken environment to determine which distributions have an explicit requirement on `qiskit>=1`.

#### I'm a developer, my environments are definitely right, and I'm still getting the error

First: you must be *absolutely* certain that your environments are correct.
The test that Qiskit uses to determine a broken environment is quite robust; specifically, it queries `importlib.metadata` for distribution information on installed packages and checks the version numbers returned.
The Qiskit 1.0 side of the test also checks for sentinel files that were present in old Qiskit versions and not Qiskit 1.0.

If you are a Qiskit developer, it's possible that you have old `qiskit.egg-info` or `qiskit-terra.egg-info` (or `*.dist-info`) directories present on your meta path (see `sys.meta_path`), left over from old editable installations.

> In particular, check your working directory for any `*.egg-info` and `*.dist-info` directories.

Reviewer 2: I don't know if anyone is reading this far down in the guide, but I think the problem could also be `__pycache__` directories if you use `pip install -e`. You could suggest `git clean -fxd` after the user checks that there are no important uncommitted files.

Author: `__pycache__` shouldn't cause problems here, because the first `importlib` search is for distributions not packages, and then the second is a search for "is `qiskit.tools` a loadable module _with a backing source file_?".  It's not enough for the `qiskit/tools` directory to be on the path, even if `qiskit/tools/__pycache__/__init__.*.pyc` exists, because we test that the `ModuleSpec` has a proper location for the file (`qiskit/tools.py` or `qiskit/tools/__init__.py`) to verify it's not an empty namespace package left over from a dirty source tree.

I'm hesitant to suggest `git clean` for general use because it's too easy to accidentally take out local changes, or clean out all your cached tox environments, etc.

Reviewer 2: My comment was misleading. When I said "this problem," I was thinking of the problem of left over files repo that had been installed in editable mode rather than the specific `import qiskit` problem with left over namespace package metadata.

I didn't fully test it but somehow there were some code removals that didn't trigger import errors for me with my editable install, and I had assumed the imports were still working because that is how things worked with Python 2 and the .pyc files left over in directories that had had the .py files removed. Maybe it was actually the info directories or something else. I didn't try to recreate the problem after doing the clean.

That particular case was coming up for me with other packages that set up Qiskit plugins in the package metadata (specifically qiskit-ibm-provider's transpiler pass plugin that imported from `qiskit.extensions`). It kept working in my editable install but then failed in the clean CI environment. It is a surprising case because I was not using the plugin or anything else from qiskit-ibm-provider but just having the distribution with the plugin installed is enough to trigger an error when trying to do a transpile. I was wondering if there was anything to mention related to that in the troubleshooting section, but I think ultimately it is a consequence of having a package that is not compatible with Qiskit 1.0 installed, so that is already covered.

Author: Could you send me a set of repro steps, and I'll look into either making the import check smarter, or adding an extra bit to the troubleshooting section in this guide in a day or so?
